it was supposed to be the perfect crime
the victim Alexander Litvinenko
a Russian dissident former Secret
Service agent and relentless critic of
Vladimir Putin the alleged murderers
Dmitry Kovtun and Andrey Lugovoy also
former Russian Secret Service agents
then working as private investigators in
Russia and Europe the attack would take
place November 1st 2006 at the
Millennium Hotel on Grosvenor Square in
London in the reception area there is a
security camera that records images 24
hours a day that camera recorded these
recently released videos of the alleged
killers Lugovoy and Kovtun at the
reception desk on november 1st the two
men entered the pine bar off the hotel
lobby at about 3:20 p.m. they ordered
three cups of tea also a couple of gin
and tonics
the evidence shows that they poured two
cups of tea for themselves then added
poison into the teapot a small amount of
highly radioactive polonium-210 a
security camera caught this image of
Andrey Lugovoy at 3:33 on his way to the
washroom notice his left hand is
concealed in his jacket pocket
Colten took his turn at 3:48 one or both
of them left traces of radioactivity on
the door as they entered the washroom
and then again as they washed their
hands and used the hand dryer meanwhile
Alexander Litvinenko was making his way
to the hotel this security camera photo
shows him coming up the street at 3:44
p.m. he entered the hotel lobby at
precisely 4:00 o'clock his image
recorded by the reception desk camera
Litvinenko later told police that he
only took two or three sips of the tea
which he found tasted quite bitter weeks
later police would discover a high
amount of radiation contamination in the
teapot especially concentrated in the
spout polonium is a slow-acting but
deadly poisoning the fan ankle would not
feel the effects on the drive home he
became violently ill shortly after
midnight that night but would suffer 23
days of agony in hospital before he
finally died he identified Lugovoy cough
tun and others who might have poisoned
him but made clear in this police
interview that only one man in Russia
was ultimately to blame
have a knowledge of the system I know
that this order about such a killing of
a citizen of another country on its
territory especially if it's something
to do with Great Britain could have been
given only by one person would you like
to tell us who that person is that
person is the President of the Russian
Federation Vladimir Putin Alexander
Litvinenko died at 9:21 p.m. on November
23rd 2006 alcohol vignette Litvinenko's
accusation against Putin was made public
on the day he died
the Russian leader instantly denied it
and even suggested there was no evidence
that Litvinenko had in fact been more
militant gospel Canisius 'no militants
comes a cuchini Britta's karachi near to
Kazan in approach to an assistant
the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko at
this London Hotel in 2006 set off a
political earthquake that first shook
the UK Russian diplomatic relations and
eventually relations between Vladimir
Putin and the entire Western world the
full details of the police investigation
are only now being released at a public
inquiry here that inquiry is moving
relentlessly towards an indictment of
the Russian government but the question
is continually asked why would Vladimir
Putin or anyone around him decide to
target this low ranking political
dissident why Alexander Litvinenko in
this picture he's about 18 years old
marina Litvinenko was married to
Alexander she called Sasha Sasha's
grandparents parents his grandfather
Litvinenko joined up at the KGB when he
was only a teenager marina met and
married him in 1994 when they were both
in their early 30s she was a little
taken aback to find out that he was in
the Russian Secret Service then called
the FSB when I saw Sasha I said he
didn't look like an officer of any
security service at all he was just a
very slim very young looking girl she
was very shy and for me his personality
was more important for actually what he
did I was very proud of him Luke Harding
is covering the Litvinenko inquiry for
The Guardian newspaper he lived for
years in Russia and wrote a book called
mafia State Alexander Litvinenko was a
career officer in Russian intelligence
he began working for the FSB
in the 90s and his specialism was
organized crime sort of mafia the
Russian mafia and so he was involved
with that quite heavily and in the
mid-1990s something extraordinary
happened
there was an attempt to murder Boris
Berezovsky who at this point was a kind
of key player in Boris Yeltsin's kind of
court a kind of grey eminence who pulled
the strings behind the scenes and levena
anchor was tasked to investigate who
tried to kill Berezovsky and they became
friends
someone had exploded a bomb beside Boris
Berezovsky scar killing his driver and a
bodyguard
Berezovsky escaped and during the
investigation Berezovsky came to trust
with an ankle and consider him almost a
bodyguard Berezovsky had many enemies
especially in the FSB secret police and
one day Litvinenko was asked by his
superiors to help kill Berezovsky he
walked over to me and said do you know
Berezovsky I said I did then you have to
kill him I just remained silent and
pointed at the walls since many of the
offices were bugged he just leaned
forward like this and said you must kill
Berezovsky you must do it Litvinenko
refused and revealed the plot to
Berezovsky and to marina when I heard
this first time I couldn't believe
because it was just like a nonsense who
might have idea to kill very softly and
for what reasons and Berezovsky couldn't
believe himself in July 1998
Berezovsky convinced President Yeltsin
to clean house at the FSB and appoint a
friend of his to be the new secret
police head Vladimir Putin he also set
up a meeting between Putin and
Litvinenko to talk about corruption
inside the organization
I gave you my report and he looked at
the chart but refused to take it he also
asked for my home phone number I asked
him what it was for
he said I'll call you a few days later
an FSB friend laughed at me yeah you
sure went to the right guy Putin they
just laughed at you and took your phone
number so I said how do you know that
and he said Putin ordered us to bug your
phone Alex Goldfarb was a longtime
friend of Alexander Litvinenko and a
co-author with his widow of the book
death of a dissident Putin was just a
point over this colossal agency with
many people much higher than his former
rank now reporting to him and his
success as a new director dependent not
so much on political support than by the
acceptance and confidence of the KGB a
generous so he was buying for the
acceptance and approval and when this
maverick officer came up with his
allegations of corruption it was quite
natural in return in retrospect the
Putin would not be happy with me
Litvinenko decided to go public with his
corruption allegations at this
remarkable televised press conference in
Moscow several colleagues some masked to
protect their identity also supported
Litvinenko's claim that senior policemen
were now secretly murdering their own
political enemies Putin doesn't like
people who kind of talk publicly about
secret operations about about
operational plots and so on and I think
he was incensed by what had happened and
very quickly the authorities started
moving against living NK himself and he
found himself in all kinds of trouble
he was an honest cop who had from
childhood some illusions about what the
right thing and what's the wrong thing
he was very black and white he didn't
see nuances and he tried to maneuver
himself within the situation of big
politics were very powerful and
resourceful forces were lashing each
other and he always was caught in
between somehow Litvinenko was soon
arrested and charged with all sorts of
crimes based on manufactured accusations
he had no doubt that Vladimir Putin was
orchestrating the charade under the KGB
hey you don't talk about operational
matters in public to do so much to break
the code if you break the code you're a
traitor and if you're a traitor then you
have to be punished
Litvinenko was not convicted of the
charges but he and Boris Berezovsky
decided it wasn't safe for them to
remain in Russia they both made plans to
escape
Litvinenko convinced his wife to take
their son on a quick vacation to Spain
he secretly left the country separately
and only then revealed to her his plan
to defect to the west
he said we might be not going back to
Russia and I said no way
where are we going to what you're going
to do it he told me marina they
definitely will arrest me they
definitely will do something chronic
against you or our son nobody will save
you nobody will support us what you will
decide I said of course I will decide to
save our family
Litvinenko along with his wife and son
Anatoly were accepted as political
refugees in the United Kingdom Boris
Berezovsky rented them a house in London
and they started building a new life
Litvinenko planned to become a private
investigator and security consultant he
was also working clandestinely for
British intelligence after living in can
moved to London in 2000 he maintained
contact with a whole lot of people in
Russia they were people who gave him
information information that he would
pass the British intelligence to mi6 and
information that he would try and sell
to to kind of risk companies in London
who were doing due diligence on Russia
on people trying to invest in Russia
back home in Russia
Litvinenko had now become a kind of
traitor poster boy for Vladimir Putin
secret police
they used his photograph of target
practice
it was an ominous signal of what was to
come a key event in the live and Ankle
story occurred in 1999
there was a series of enormous
explosions which leveled some Moscow
apartment blocks almost 300 people were
killed the police blamed Chechen
separatists for the crime
there was disturbing evidence however
that the FSB secret police might be
involved people should not the petals of
butter a little English garden is no
political media to negate second some
FSB officers were caught red-handed
placing explosives into apartment
building basements they later tried to
claim it was a training exercise
Alexander Litvinenko was incensed about
the story and wrote a book called
blowing up Russia flying up Russia
basically alleged that the FSB Putin's
spy agency had secretly blown up
apartment blocks in Moscow and other
Russian cities in 1999 essentially as a
pretext to start a new war in Chechnya
and that's exactly what happened there
was the second chechen war and on the
back of this kind of patriotic feeling
which sort of swept across the nation
Vladimir Putin won the presidential
election and won a massive majority in
May 2000 and so this was a kind of
foundational moment for the Putin regime
and and then we have live in the Inca
City in London saying actually it was
all of a cynical plot basically in which
almost 300 people were murdered to bring
Putin to power
he actually was the one who convinced me
that I was skeptical because it totals
language to think that your own security
services will blow up your own citizens
in their sleep and such numbers and I
said oh come on we have guys who could
you know kill their own mother who are
simply pathological killers the russian
parliament the Duma proceeded with an
official investigation of the apartment
bombings Sergei Yushchenko a member of
that Investigation Commission is
assassinated in April 2003 another new
Yuri shekel chicken was murdered in July
2003 a third note otto Latsis was
assaulted in november 2003 then died in
a mysterious car accident two years
later the Russian American journalist
and author Masha Gessen
was living and working in Moscow in the
aftermath of the apartment bombings
basically the people who've been in any
way involved with the investigation and
this included parliament members and
journalists and an television journalist
where the out of the country were facing
threats and danger over the course of
the following five or six years all of
the ones who ended up in Russia who
stayed in Russia or live in yoga who
let's the country we're dead and in the
country that story has never been fully
investigated the story has never we
never got the answers and I doubt we
ever will live in yonkers book who's
them the best effort to put the story
together in a systematic manner and I
found it very compelling and very
important Litvinenko formed a strong
friendship with the crusading Russian
investigative journalist Anna
Politkovskaya who also wrote about the
Russian apartment bombings and was also
severely critical of the Putin regime
Politkovskaya was first poisoned to warn
her off her journalism she survived but
shortly afterwards was shot to death in
the stairway at her Moscow apartment
building when the deceased news about
his death I remember how Sasha was
shocked he felt like he couldn't protect
her of course you couldn't protect him
but she tried to tell her how dangerous
it better for her to to live somewhere
else but not in Moscow because she was a
like a target for this regime and when
anna was killed it became like reality
an only question who's next
my name is Aleksandra - nunca van
fornicating in the festivities at the
frontline Club in London in the
aftermath of the Politkovskaya killing
there was a public meeting of Russian
dissidents at which Alexander Litvinenko
directly accused Vladimir Putin of
murdering the crusading journalist mr.
Putin the President of the Russian
Federation was guilty which I think
given Enco was deeply affected by
Politkovskaya shmurda he made a speech
at the frontline Club in London not any
denouncing killing but there were close
friends they'd seen it sure other a lot
but also explicitly blaming Vladimir
Putin saying that Putin was responsible
and within three weeks we have to allow
assassins from Moscow coming to London
with a radioactive substance on a
mission to kill every English
Litvinenko felt very safe in the united
kingdom under the protection of the
British government yes absolutely he
thought that UK is totally safe and not
only him but everybody around him myself
included told him that now you're safe
nothing can happen here nobody would
even think about hurting you in the UK
UK was considered a fortress which is
impenetrable
Litvinenko did receive threats while he
was in England once when visiting of the
famous Russian dissident Vladimir
Bukovsky in Cambridge he received a
phone call telling him that if he
returned to Russia to face trial as a
traitor
his wife and child would be spared
otherwise they might all be killed on
another occasion he received this email
from Moscow advising him that he had
been sentenced to extrajudicial
elimination the threat came from a
retired senior FSB agent named victor
shabanah
it was passed along to lift an ankle by
a Russian dissident lawyer mikhail
trepashkin yep yep this was yes I wrote
the letter for passion' says the Russian
secret police were very open about their
plan to kill the financial bull even
legend star in this particular case was
very demonstrative just to show that
this is exactly what will happen to
those who write those negative stories
about first of all the FSB and about the
country's leadership
Alexander definian told me said Boris
it's possible to fight person against us
impossible to fight person against my
system and if they decide to kill us
they will kill us I share this vision if
Kremlin Putin the intelligence services
decide to kill me I don't have any
chance to survive the suspected lead
murderer Andrey Lugovoy was also a
former Russian FSB agent with whom
Litvinenko worked well in Russia Lugovoy
showed up in London 2005 and eventually
proposed the kind of partnership with
Litvinenko they would kind of go into
business together they would become
business partners that
Lugovoy would supply information from
his most favorite contacts Olivia he
would sell it and they would share their
profits at a lavish 60th birthday party
for Boris Berezovsky in London in
January 2006 Andrey Lugovoy was
photographed in a group with marina
Litvinenko Sasha told me Lugovoy is very
keen to extend his business to England
he wants to make something kind of
private investigation business and for
Sasha it was a period of time to do
something for himself became more
independent financially and being
something more serious it was a
discussion for two of them to do this in
the last year of his life Litvinenko
became involved in an investigation of
criminal activity directly related to
Vladimir Putin several Russian gangsters
were arrested his fame and lift an ankle
was going to testify in their trials
about the gangsters long-standing
connections to Putin
he won't helped the law enforcement to
establish beyond doubt the personal
connections between real gangsters with
people immediately close to Putin Putin
himself back in nine in the 1990s and
that was a political embarrassing if
there were a trial for example of
Russian mafia in Spain and then I've had
FSB officer would testify he would be
star witness and that is the kind of
threat he posed as far as many thing
that's the most plausible motive
Litvinenko told Lugovoy about his role
in the upcoming spanish trials
information Lugovoy likely shared in
moscow it was at that time that Lugovoy
and Kovtun were apparently recruited to
kill Litvinenko and the murder weapon
was selected the moment that entered his
fate was sealed when the killers of
alexander litvinenko arrived in london
they didn't realize that they left a
trail of radioactive contamination in
every location they visited on
everything the country evidence
presented at the inquiry showed exactly
where the contamination was detected on
chairs tables and the teapot the areas
in purple showed the highest readings
called full scale deflection let's get
back to three or four years nuclear
physicist NIC priest is one of the
world's leading experts on polonium 210
the radioactive poison each ozan as the
murder weapon in the lip and ankle case
we have tea which was contaminated so a
small amount of clear polonium could
have been added to the tea pots of tea
the moment we've done this and the tea
pot is contaminated
I drink it my mouth is now contaminated
I might wipe my knife my hand is now
contaminated I put my hand down on the
table the table is now contaminated I
might put my arm on the seat that's
contaminated and I push the door open
with my hand that's now contaminated so
you end up with a whole chain of
contamination the Russian government has
gone to extreme lengths to try and
explain away the trail of radioactive
contamination that leads to Moscow the
Kremlin has repeatedly suggested that
Alexander Litvinenko must have been
smuggling polonium and accidentally
poisoned himself with it Alexander
Nekrasov is a former Kremlin adviser he
might have poisoned himself because he
didn't really know how to handle this
you know these materials could have
opened the container or something or he
could have been taken out by some people
actually in Britain even the Moke even
the security services because you know
he was talking too much and so on but no
the trace doesn't go to Moscow in fact
experts at the inquiry traced the
polonium to a nuclear reactor just east
of Moscow in the russian town of Sarov
Putin has made public visits to the
facility in Seraph where polonium is
used as a trigger for nuclear weapons
polonium from here has also been sold to
Western countries it turns out that
every batch of radioactive polonium has
its own unique chemical composition
which reveals where it was made
every radioactive material which is
produced in a reactor has its own
fingerprint and of course there was a
lot of polonium from Russia which was
being used in the Europe and in the West
and you could compare the material with
with that material the inquiry
established that the polonium was first
brought to London on a Transaero flight
from Moscow on October 16th by Andrey
Lugovoy
and Dmitry Kovtun they had scheduled a
meeting with Alexander Litvinenko at a
security company at 25 drove nursery in
London the public inquiry revealed that
this was likely the first attempt to
kill Litvinenko but it failed the poison
apparently spilled the police later
found massive radioactive contamination
of the tablecloth and some also on the
boardroom chairs now we don't know
precisely what happened but I think our
best guess is that the palladium was put
in a jug or a cup and there's I think
Lebanon have failed to drink I think if
he drunk from the water at that point he
he would have been killed but he didn't
the killer's return to the Shaftesbury
hotel where one of them apparently
decided to dispose of the rest of the
polonium it was spilled down the sink
the polonium left a radioactive trail on
the sink drain and especially in the
u-shaped drain pipe were it likely sat
for some time polonium will tend to
stick to surfaces so if you put it down
into the into the into the water system
into the drains it would stick there
would stick onto the surfaces ceramic
surfaces particular sticks particularly
hard to anything which is metal
basically it just fuses and becomes part
of the the metal surface marina
Litvinenko later remembered that her
husband was somewhat ill on the day of
that first attempt on his life she felt
a little bit down and he didn't feel
well and then she suddenly vomited and
he tried not to eat next day and just
day after next just try to keep and
understand how does he feel was really
unusual and why made me to remember this
and when we talk after to police
I remind this day when Sasha became sick
Lugovoy and Kovtun returned to Moscow
Lugovoy came back to London alone just
one week later on October 25th for what
appears to be the second murder attempt
police later found radioactive
contamination on his airline seat this
time he stayed at the upscale Sheraton
Park Lane Hotel where again he had some
meetings with Litvinenko for some reason
he must have changed his mind and
returned to his room the police later
discovered contamination on the bedside
table and especially in the bathroom
apparently the polonium was thrown into
the wastebasket which recorded very high
levels of radioactivity as did the
floors and wall decided this one moment
where two scientists turn up at room 8
for eight of the Sheraton Park Hotel
where literally stayed in October 2006
they they put their guy who counters out
and the rings are so alarming they
retreat they literally have to leave the
room because the room is so toxic this
this is how dangerous this Fleming was
Lugovoy flew back to moscow again
leaving radioactive contamination on his
airline seat and returned two days later
this time meeting up with his alleged
co-conspirator Dmitry Kovtun apparently
Litvinenko took an instant dislike to
costume he said he was a very unpleasant
very antisocial and looked very rude and
CC and I remember one sentence about
Haughton what coughed and said I don't
care about anything can just live only
money what I don't care about the sash
it was quite not not good characteristic
of person an amazing story of Dmitry
Kovtun activities leading up to the
murder was revealed the British Enquirer
it seems that Dmitry Kovtun who flew to
Germany where he used to live before
flying to London to kill it when the
anchor met a friend from the Italian
restaurant in Hamburg where he went
before this is on the eve of the
poisoning attempt and tells his friend I
have a very expensive poison and I've
got a poison someone who's a traitor
I've got to put it in their food or
drink do you know any cooks in London
who could help me which is amazing and
what was extraordinary was the friend
the German waiter said yeah he had you
know cook passed him the number and on
the morning of the poisoning
Coughlin's founds the cook who is busy
unavailable and you can't make this
stuff up I mean these are witness
statements which you're going to be
given in court and for me I think this
is convincing proof that little one cost
me guilty Lugovoy and Kovtun poison him
and you will decide when the CCTV
footage of alexander litvinenko
approaching the Millennium Hotel was
played at the public enquiry along with
the images of Lugovoy and Kovtun
preparing to kill him
marina Litvinenko felt an overwhelming
urge to try to reach out and stop time
I'm very realistic person I'm very
logical but I just felt if something you
can change the to put such different
direction to make something not happen
and this meets include the never ever
but of course I know it might be in the
movie but not in real life
the thing about polonium is this if you
keep it securely
it's obviously not very good for you but
it won't kill you if you ingest it in
other words to swallow it or inject it
then you're a dead man walking
when we come back held the libman ankle
polonium mystery was solved
after the fateful Millennium Hotel
meeting Alexander Litvinenko returned to
his home in North London for dinner with
his family it was a celebration of the
sixth anniversary of their arrival in
Britain at midnight he began to vomit
uncontrollably Sasha said from very
beginning it might be not food poisoning
it looks so damaging it looks so unusual
he said symptom at symptoms too similar
to what they did study in the college
when it says some chemical poisoning
from zinc Lexus but I try to every time
to say no let my how it might be
chemical poisoning or something
different like who could do this to you
after two days Litvinenko was taken to
his local hospital and then transferred
to London's University Hospital doctors
worked feverishly trying to figure out
the cause of his illness as word of the
poisoning sprint reporters gathered
outside the hospital very tired
Alex Goldfarb briefed him on
Litvinenko's condition older and then he
as he watched his friend deteriorating
quickly I've seen a couple of people
dying of cancer so that was very much
like a deterioration of a terminal
cancer patient but what usually happens
in over the period of several months it
happened within a week on day twelve
Litvinenko's hair began to fall out try
to calm him down and I was in rubber
gloves and when I just tried to calm him
and then I realized oh he's here in my
gloves and then I said first time doctor
would cease why why it happened and he
said again it might decide the fact of
this a medical treatment
but I couldn't wait and I couldn't be
patient anymore I just said we need to
talk to two more doctors and it was the
first time and the doctor from cancer
unit said he looks exactly like his
patient after chemical or radioactive
treatment the impact which Alexander
Litvinenko had from the polonium is
probably about the same as having 500
cat-scans one after the other at the
same time at first the doctors suspected
radioactive thallium poisoning but then
ruled that out because there was no
gamma radiation that normally
accompanies thallium by now the police
and nuclear scientists were also
involved searching for clues at all the
locations Litvinenko visited the facial
thirties as lavinia he lay dying in a
London hospital room they didn't know
what was poisoning him that they had
these radiation symptoms but no gamma
radiation which is what you would
normally expect and it was only
literally in the last hours before he
died that they discovered this was
radioactive polonium and the reason they
didn't find out before polonium had
never been used as a murder weapon
before sending not in the UK not in the
Western world
nuclear experts think the murderers
believe that their poison with its alpha
radiation would never be detected its
kintyre ly reasonable to think it might
not have been detected after all it was
only detected on the day before he died
and is quite conceivable it would seem
to me that he would have died and people
would have thought it's some sort of
infection or some sort of other poison
and he would have been buried without
the polonium being detected
this is the last image of Alexander
Litvinenko before he died he was
incredibly weak his face pockmarked from
the poison in his system when I left him
last day before she was able to talk he
was a very very quiet all day he didn't
talk and when I say I'm ready to go home
and he smiled but his smile was so sad
and I said Sasha please don't worry I'm
going back soon if you just told me
buddy night I love you so much and he
this is so quiet and I say just oh it's
so good to hear it from you I don't
remember when you did say this last time
and actually for last was what I heard
Alexander Litvinenko was buried 14 days
after he died in London's Highgate
Cemetery
the coffin was lined with lead to
prevent radioactive contamination of the
pallbearers
by this time London Police had already
traced the polonium trail back to Moscow
and to Andrey Lugovoy former KGB man
Lugovoy has staunchly maintained his
innocence ever since Luke Harding has
met him numerous times it's as if
someone had taken his conscience and
shared it off with a pair of scissors
there's just there's an emptiness there
there's a there's a coldness there
there's a calculating side to him now
he's not stupid
he's a reasonably intelligent person who
I think has been very well coached and
whose subsequent career since this case
has prospered Vladimir Putin has
protected lugar voice and denounced the
British investigations and the public
inquiry as deeply biased against Russia
started on depression there are certain
people in Britain who want this inquiry
to take place because it gives them
opportunity to attack Russia especially
nowadays when the Ukraine crisis is a
major major irritant in the relations
between Russia and the West this is a
charade this is something that shouldn't
be happening in a court of law in
Britain of all places this enquiry is
tremendously important either we we
believe things we believe in human
rights we believe in a legal process we
believe that there should be punishment
for a crime or we live in this kind of
knee allistic Putin world where we don't
believe in anything where it's just
great powers battling against each other
the zones of influence that were plunged
back into the world of the 19th century
meanwhile Putin's critics have continued
to die the latest Russian opposition
leader Boris Nemtsov murdered in front
of the Kremlin as the Litvinenko inquiry
was in session in London after what
happened is sash in 2006 and now we in
the 2015 and is not only my story it's a
story of Russia and how Russia has
changed for all this period of time and
how many other people have been killed
and I believe all responsibilities is on
the Russian government in men who
responsible for all of it happened to
Russia now it's a mr. Putin himself
Alexandre literally on Camilla it's my
city my shi- Cypriot shoe store on mocks
college- know what I show you my soup of
dementia Roberto ordered Domino's Casa
the key question raised by the British
inquiry concerns the role of Vladimir
Putin and whether he personally ordered
this murder
Vladimir Putin has repeatedly said that
Alexander Litvinenko was not worth
killing because he had no access to
Russian secrets and Putin's defenders
say he would never become personally
involved in a foreign assassination well
first of all the head of state and it's
not only Russia never gets involved in
anything like that ever because it's
just it goes against the whole nature of
the head of state office and that is why
I always find it ridiculous when I hear
accusations of Putin as president
ordering a hit you know it just doesn't
work like that
well it's only used to where like that
there's plenty of evidence from retired
former KGB spy masters who said that
these things were authorized at the very
top of the Soviet state by the Politburo
if you remember that the invasion of
Crimea by Russian troops a year ago said
originally there were no Russian troops
there subsequently admitted that he was
lying although he didn't use those words
and then said that he had personally
micromanaged it you personally
micromanage this so it really we know
that that Putin makes very important
decisions and this was certainly one of
them
Alexander Litvinenko son Anatoly was
only 12 when his father died he's now a
student at East European studies at
London University he rejects the idea
that his father's murder could have been
carried out by junior Russian officials
without putin's approval especially
considering the expense of the operation
one thing no virginia person will have
the means to take such a responsibility
to take such an action because it was
very unlikely bill to have access to a
multimillion-pound radioactive isotope
such as polonium so don't you may not
have a means to do that I don't think
anyone would risk being responsible for
the death of one of Russia's greatest I
guess critics every time without of our
person's knowledge without his kind of
blessing so to speak Marina and Anatoly
Litvinenko believed that all the
evidence that the public inquiry is
pointing towards Vladimir Putin as the
author of the crime and all experts
agree that it could not have happened
without direct authorization of mr.
Putin because not only because it's in
the UK and not only because it involves
a radioactive weapon but also because
everybody in the system knows about long
personal history that existed between
between Janka Putin and breslov scheme
and the emotional attitude that mr.
Putin has to this crowd of people hiding
from him in London so nobody in his
right mind would authorize such an
operation without asking first
because nobody would have known what the
attitude of the boss would be so this to
me is the strongest argument that it
couldn't have happened without Putin's
knowledge when he first moved to the
United Kingdom and was raising the alarm
about Vladimir Putin Alexander
Litvinenko was astounded at the warm
reception accorded the Russian president
by many Western countries
little gift even after it was clear that
the Russian government was likely
responsible for Litvinenko's murder then
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
announced America's desire to hit the
reset button and restore a cordial
relations with Moscow many Russians saw
a kind of willful blindness in the West
about here was a man who jailed as
murder he destroyed the the electoral
system destroyed the federal system
absolutely reversed judicial reform and
only about eight years into his reign
were Western media even starting to talk
about his authoritarian tendencies I
mean he had built a fully fledged
authoritarian regime at that point he
had destroyed what little democracy
there had been enough and Western
editors and Western Western politicians
were willfully ignorant and and
dismissive of what he had been doing the
reset button was very much part of the
same story in this case there is a
specific guy by the name of Vladimir
Putin who ordered to kill my friend
and the husband of my other friend
marina and he has to be hold held
responsible regardless of whether he is
a dictator or a Democrat or a big friend
of the United States or the pole he
isn't murderer and that's important
what's important
judge Robert Owen is presiding over the
Litvinenko inquiry he has already said
that there is a prima facie case against
the Russian government as being
responsible for the murder it is
unlikely that he could go beyond that to
lay the blame on Vladimir Putin himself
five years ago however leaked diplomatic
cables showed that a senior American
official privately told European allies
that the Litvinenko plot could not have
been carried out without Putin's
knowledge and approval all this creates
a serious challenge for the UK
government and the West how to deal with
a world leader who almost everyone
believes is personally guilty of murder
you